Paul Armstrong blog on Custom Facts (#1832)
theforeman/theforeman.org: _posts/2021-05-20-implementing-custom-facts-for-foreman-discovery.md

---
layout: post

> title: Implementing Custom Facts for Foreman Discovery

Reviewer: Oh come on, this is a boring title. I want a clickbait article! Something juicy!!!

Automatic discovery of cluster of Intel NUC machines

Or something like that :-)

date: 2021-05-20  07:43:49
author: Paul Armstrong
tags:
- foreman
---

Foreman Discovery is a powerful tool for provisioning new hardware. The system facts discovered by Facter when the Foreman Discovery Image boots provide us with important information needed to determine how a system should be provisioned. Many of the facts we need are captured out of the box, but what happens when we need something a little more? This is where custom facts come into play.

<!--more-->

<p float='left' align='center'>

>   <img src="/static/images/blog_images/2021-05-20-Implementing-Custom-Facts-Foreman-Discovery/2021-05-20_1.jpg" width="700" />

Reviewer: Nitpick: The image is almost 2MB size, we might consider resampling it to 1080p or something like that. It's resampled to 700px by the browser anyway.

Author: I'm in training until 5pm. I'm on PTO tomorrow. 
I have a list of things to finish today after the class finishes. 
I will not have time to fix this image today, so we can delay the blog until next week if this is important?

Reviewer: Ok doing `mogrify -resize 700x static/images/blog_images/2021-05-20-Implementing-Custom-Facts-Foreman-Discovery/2021-05-20_1.jpg`

      "Stack3 NUC3"
...
...
    else
      mac
    end
  end

```

This isn’t the only thing that we can add to the Foreman Discovery Image. There are a number of other extensions that can be made use of. In the `bin` directory, binaries can be included that are able to be used in scripts to perform actions required at discovery time. In the `autostart.d` directory shell scripts can be added that use the included binaries. The `lib` and `lib/ruby` directories are added to the `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` and `RUBYLIB` path respectively so that any included binaries can be executed properly. Please see the [Foreman Provisioning documentation](https://docs.theforeman.org/nightly/Provisioning_Guide/index-foreman-el.html#Extending_the_Discovery_Image) for more details.

With the example file built, it is time to deploy the code to the Foreman server to make use of it with discovery. In the `MyProjectDirectory`, zip the contents of the directory tree to a file with:

```
zip -r discovery_facts.zip .
```

Copy the resulting zip file to the foreman server and place it in `/var/lib/tftpboot/boot`

```
scp discovery_facts.zip root@myforemanhost.example.com:/var/lib/tftpboot/boot/
```

> Now we need to modify a provisioning template to tell the discovery image that there is something additional that it needs to include when it starts. Navigate to the provisioning templates page on your foreman server and search for the `pxelinux_discovery` snippet. You can unlock the snippet to edit it or clone it. For simplicity we will unlock the templates for editing.

Reviewer: I want to say let's stop telling our users to unlock templates. Unlock feature is bad, we want them to clone them.

BUT

In this case I would waive this, because once you clone, then you also need to clone and update the template which use the snippet because of the name change.... so. Carry on!

> Edit the `APPEND` line in `pxelinux_discover`y provisioning snippet on your foreman server to include a parameter that references the zip file. You can use more than one zip file to ease some of the management burden. The file can be located anywhere under `tftpboot`, the `fdi.zips` parameter provides the relative path. It can be beneficial to have separate directories for your code. The line for the example look similar to this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit the `APPEND` line in `pxelinux_discovery` provisioning snippet on your foreman server to include a parameter that references the zip file. You can use more than one zip file to ease some of the management burden. The file can be located anywhere under `tftpboot`, the `fdi.zips` parameter provides the relative path. It can be beneficial to have separate directories for your code. The line for the example look similar to this:
```

It is really quite simple. Following the Foreman guide, we find that we need to first create a directory structure to hold the code that is used to generate the custom facts. It looks like this:

```
MyProjectDirectory
 ├── autostart.d
 ├── bin
 ├── facts
 │   └── nuc_position_facts.rb
 └── lib
     └── ruby
```

As you can see, to generate the facts we want, we implement a bit of ruby code that is consumed by facter. This ruby file is tucked under the facts directory. In the example, we simply created a case statement to map the MAC address to the position where the board is installed within the chassis. A simple row and column model like a spreadsheet is used in this example. All the systems connected by risers are a “Stack” and each is positioned from the connecting side. The ruby code looks like this:

```

> nuc_position_facts.rb

Reviewer 2: I'd use Ruby code highlighting
```suggestion
```ruby
# nuc_position_facts.rb
```

  setcode do
    mac = Facter.value('discovery_bootif')
    case mac
    when "ff:ee:dd:cc:bb:31"
      "Stack3 NUC1"
    when "ff:ee:dd:cc:bb:32"
      "Stack3 NUC2"
    when "ff:ee:dd:cc:bb:33"
      "Stack3 NUC3"
...
...
    else
      mac
    end
  end

```

This isn’t the only thing that we can add to the Foreman Discovery Image. There are a number of other extensions that can be made use of. In the `bin` directory, binaries can be included that are able to be used in scripts to perform actions required at discovery time. In the `autostart.d` directory shell scripts can be added that use the included binaries. The `lib` and `lib/ruby` directories are added to the `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` and `RUBYLIB` path respectively so that any included binaries can be executed properly. Please see the [Foreman Provisioning documentation](https://docs.theforeman.org/nightly/Provisioning_Guide/index-foreman-el.html#Extending_the_Discovery_Image) for more details.

With the example file built, it is time to deploy the code to the Foreman server to make use of it with discovery. In the `MyProjectDirectory`, zip the contents of the directory tree to a file with:

```
zip -r discovery_facts.zip .
```

> Copy the resulting zip file to the foreman server and place it in `/var/lib/tftpboot/boot`

Reviewer 2: `/var/lib/tftpboot` is the Red Hat default. It's (sadly) different on Debian and Ubuntu.

Author: Can you give me the alternatives and I'll add them gladly?

Author: Or will I just add a note that this directory is different for Deb and Ubuntu users?

Reviewer 2: Note is ok. On Debian it's `/srv/tftp` and on Ubuntu 18.04 it's `/var/lib/tftpboot` but 20.04 it's `/srv/tftp` again.

Reviewer: Fun fact: if you install`syslinux-tftpboot` package on red hat it installs into `/tftpboot`. Weird sh... stuff.
